when David published his uh first 5,000
years of book in 2011 I'd been writing
my history of debt for about 30 years uh
starting around
1981 and I began it because as Nik said
I'm an economist and I could see that
the whole world in the 1980s was uh in a
a debt crisis certainly for what they
called the third world countries the
global South uh in
1982 Mexico defaulted and you had a
Whole Decade of Latin American uh
defaults uh on their foreign debt my
field was the balance of payments and
international debt uh but I'd also begun
to work on the domestic United States
debt and it was obvious that debts were
growing faster than the economies uh to
pay and I began to write a history of
how different countries had dealt with
the debt problem uh that debts grow
faster than you can pay and it took me
about maybe two years uh I I'd gone all
the way back through ancient Greece and
Rome got back to uh Israel and
uh also a Solin debt cancellation in
Athens and I found scattered references
to the fact that there seemed to have
been a kind of uh Babylonian Jubilee
year already in the second millennium BC
around the 18th century BC when hamar
Robi was around and I tried to trace
down what are these things and uh I the
only way that I could trace them was
reading all of the economic uh history
material uh at any rate I got through
some friends to join Harvard's Peabody
Museum which was its anthropology
department and uh working on Babylonian
archaeology and it uh soon became a
parent that yes uh people who said There
couldn't possibly be a debt cancellation
uh it wouldn't work society would fall
apart if you don't have the poor people
pay the rich people and end up in
bondage like it should be uh and uh it
turned out that they there really were
debt cancellations for thousands of
years every Sumerian king who took the
throne canel the debts every Babylonian
King who took the throne started uh his
first full year on the throne but by
canceling the debts starting all over
again and
uh basically they said they they had a
view of society very much like the year
it was a kind of social cosmology that
uh Whenever there was a new king you had
a new Reign and uh just like in England
you date the laws and anything that
happens from uh the first year of uh say
King George's Reign second year
uh that's how you did in in uh the
ancient near East You' started from uh
the beginning of a Reign and every King
wanted to begin the Reign by getting rid
of all of the imbalances that had uh
developed since the last king uh ruled
and so they' uh the guaranteed way of
getting popularities you cancel
everybody's debts uh and I'll get into
how uh that happened at any rate I had
been uh
by I organized a group of economists
rewriting the history of the ancient
near East the economic history and we
began to publish and hold colloquiums in
uh
1994 and we published
uh I think the last colloquium was in
2005 so uh By the time David published
this book I had not yet published my
what I call the popular book uh for give
them their debts but i' had published
these colloquiums and uh when uh I was
negotiating with uh Yale University
press uh to uh try to publish my book
and uh all of a sudden David's book came
out and uh people began to write me and
say uh oh David's taken all of your
ideas uh this is awful nobody you know
he's he's scooped you and uh the Yale
University reader said oh dear nobody
will read your book now David's written
his book uh as if it's completely
different and uh obviously they had not
read David's book because David was very
generous and open David was my strongest
supporter for my ideas it was David who
actually popularized my ideas to a much
broader audience than I ever would have
gotten talking to assyriologists and
archaeologists and people concerned with
uh ancient history David sort of
popularized my ideas uh
and but he put it in a more readable
form than I did uh he wrote as an
anthropologist and he wrote his book as
you know largely from his personal
experiences is an anthropologist talking
about uh uh personal ideas of uh and uh
story A Narrative of the societies that
he'd worked in and his ideas uh my book
was more historical uh deily and all
that we had had to go on were Royal
proclamations that were inscribed and
usually buried in Temple foundations and
we had the lawsuits that were written on
uniform records saying yes the debts
really have to be re have to be
cancelled uh you can't collect on a debt
after the King has canceled them so uh
we wrote in uh in a different uh tone of
voice and his tone of voice is much more
popular but it was David who got me uh
to his publisher in Germany uh we both
had the same publisher for our books and
uh
we WR ever since he published this book
uh we uh did many many things together
uh but and so what I want to talk today
are about some of the the cosmology of
uh cancelling debts the sort of there
was an ideology of cancelling debts it's
not simply that debts uh grew so fast
and people uh who ran into debt were
driven into bondage and they had to seal
their land and lose their means of
self-support uh to rich people they they
did have to do this but it was only
temporary the idea was that uh what
happens today once you in today's world
once you uh run into debt you can lose
your home uh lose your job and you go
bankrupt and you give away your property
and you can't get it you can't re go
back in time you you can't end things
once you uh default on debt it's there
and there's nothing you can do about it
and you lose everything if the ancient
near East in the third millennium BC the
second milum millennium BC if ancient
civilization would have had the kind of
rules that we have today there wouldn't
have been any civilization because it
was an agricultural economy you can
imagine imagine what happens uh the
these economies operated on credit uh
and in fact they operated on credit
right down into Medieval Times in Europe
uh you let's say you begin the crop year
uh you you plant uh during the crop year
you have to uh run up debts sometimes
you have to run up debts to pay for oxen
uh to plow the land or do something uh
you need uh to pay for seeds you need uh
just to pay just uh for living you have
to give money to the church sometimes if
you get married you have to pay uh the
priests and if you go to a bar you run
up a tab at the bar to get beer the same
thing happened in Babylonia in around n
1750 BC during the year uh the farmers
would uh cultivators would go to the bar
they'd run up the tab on the year and
all these debts that were run up during
the planting season all came due at one
time when the Harvest was in and we have
the contracts for the debts and that
said the debts are all going to be paid
on the threshing floor the farmers would
bring the grain that they grew into the
uh the temples or Civic agencies that
had of the Threshers they'd measure out
the Grain and they'd say okay this much
goes to the lady to pay for the ale you
have drink this much goes to the palace
for advances that it's done this much to
the temples this much to any uh personal
uh creditors that you may have had Well
normally everything would go smoothly
unless there was bad weather uh if there
was a drought or if there was a flood
then you couldn't
uh have enough crops to pay the debts
what was going to happen well you can
imagine what the ruler thought well if
you can't pay the debts and you owe
these people I have a choice am I going
to let all of the cultivators on the
land and we're talking about agrarian
society am I going to let them all go
broke and all of a sudden they'll be put
into bondage by their creditors and
they'll lose the land uh well what's
going to happen is the whole country
will be in bondage what are they going
to do well if that happened a number of
things would
happen would result a lot of them would
run away and there were runaways uh
throughout Antiquity or they'd uh have a
Revolt they'd overthrow the king uh or
the uh the creditors who would be the
wealthy oligarchy would say okay now I
have all these debtors that now work for
me I'm going to attack the palace and
take over the economy and replace the
kings that are supposed to be keeping
order with a creditor oriented oligarchy
just like we have in the United States
and Margaret Thatcher and uh in in
England they they would have they would
have made uh Babylonia and Assyria all
over the ancient near East look like uh
they do that what uh Margaret Thatcher
did to England and Ronald Reagan did to
the United States and it would look just
as bad as uh today's mess of countries
being in debt so the Kings uh would say
hamar robis laws uh he said if the storm
God added causes a flood Debs are
cancelled but even more important than
hamar robi's laws were the proclamations
that he and every single king of his
dynasty did as soon as they took the
throne they started the dynasty with a
clean slate they say okay we're
we're going to begin the long cycle of
society all over again with my reign the
way it should be an ideal way it's going
to be in Balance uh there nobody ow the
agrarian society doesn't owe any debts
the commercial debts among Merchants
they were left in place but not the
personal debts of people on the land
they were all cancelled and uh the bond
servants were free to go back to their
own families they didn't have to work
for the Creditor anymore and the slaves
that had been pledged to creditors also
were still slaves but they were returned
to their original owners the debtors who
pledged them and any land rights or land
tenure that had been pledged was given
back this is uh familiar in Israel's in
judaism's uh Jubilee year uh where for
word taken from uh Babylonian practice
uh probably brought back by the uh the
Jews who were uh taken to Babylonia
after Judea lost the war with it they
returned to Israel uh once the Persian
king Cyrus said yes you can go back they
returned to uh Judea and uh essentially
wrote the Bible and wrote the idea of
debt cancellation all into Biblical
history of this is around the 5ifth
century BC the time of Ezra and Nehemiah
uh
and to say well we're not going to have
Kings cancel the debts anymore because
by the middle of the first Millennium
the Kings had become tools of the
oligarchy and uh they weren't nice Kings
anymore they were very exploitative so
Judaism put this Royal debt cancellation
idea right in the center of its religion
taking it out of the hands of the Kings
and the Civil Authorities that's uh sort
of uh the big picture and uh again uh
there was so much of a disbelief that uh
somehow Society could work without uh
creating an oligarchy to end up
enslaving everyone else like happened in
uh Rome and happened in Greece uh that
it they thought history couldn't have
happened this way all of this is sort of
an utopian ideal uh about the Garden of
Eden and uh uh it just wasn't wasn't
believed that somehow that could be that
way well David's book put the idea of
debt cancellation into a broad public
plane and uh through what he did uh
organizing Occupy Wall Street made the
whole idea of debt cancellation uh in
the center of uh public discussion uh
and that that's why the Obama
Administration uh one night sent police
by the all the Occupy Wall Street things
that where there were encampments of
supporters if there there were musicians
there that would bring guitars and
things the police would smash the
guitars they'd smash anybody's computers
they'd beat up everybody and Obama said
we cannot have discussion of debt
cancellation my backers are the uh the
wealthy B Bankers I work for the bankers
and I'm going to we're going to have the
PE police uh beat you up and uh
basically uh we're going to Black you
list you from jobs you cannot discuss
the concept of debt cancellation uh
without being treated as a public enemy
and being beaten up uh that was a time
when uh David decided I think it's time
to move to England uh and he moved uh
back there uh where he had a friendly uh
Professor uh at the University and was
able to uh do his teaching uh his
teaching I think distracted him from a
lot of the writing uh he said Mo uh what
he ended up teaching was English as a
second language uh to most of the
anthropology students instead of
teaching anthropology and uh he he
couldn't say no when it came to helping
people uh very much so uh I'm not sure
what he could do in England that uh you
you uh that would be better than what he
could do uh in the United States but at
any rate what he discussed in his
anthropological writing was something
much broader than de cancellation he
noticed that uh in all the anthropology
societies there was a problem of what do
you do with egotistical people who want
power and the way you get power is to
get wealth and uh the problem that every
anthropological Society uh faced was
what do you do uh to prevent some uh
ambitious individuals from trying to get
rich by hurting other individuals uh
right to today's world if you uh take an
economics course they say uh private
Enterprise and the desire for wealth is
what drives the world forward but if any
anthropological society would have done
that in Antiquity then uh uh then the
wealthy people would pretty quickly have
taken over society and uh essentially
said all the growth is going to be mine
not yours and everybody would have run
away or they would have killed these
people so the challenge to uh
anthropological societies was how do we
keep uh ambition people wanting to get a
claim we all like a claim uh by doing
something good well it was by being uh
being civil it was these were mutual Aid
societies and you got a support not from
accumulating wealth and saying I'm
richer than you are uh and I can use my
wealth to make loans to you and get you
in debt and make you poor it was by
giving away uh money by supporting
Society so uh these anthropological
societies based on Mutual Aid tended to
grow and they would attract population
there and they would attract especially
populations from neighboring areas that
uh didn't weren't so positive and people
would run away and join uh these
societies that's how Rome was built uh
by the Kings they said you know we're
going to establish the city for people
who run away from oppressive Realms and
if you come to Rome you know we know
it's not the nicest place that's why we
uh we were able to it's subtle here a
lot of mosquitoes on the Tyber but you
come here we'll give you uh your own
land you can support yourself uh we're
going to protect you from being uh uh
put in bondage uh and you'll become a
citiz in and join our army that's how
they built up Rome until finally uh a
group of
uh oligarchs came from neighboring towns
along with The Runaways and the
oligarchy overthrew the the Kings u in
in 509 BC and the whole rest of Rome for
five centuries was wrought by Civil War
by uh debtors uh rebelling wanting a
debt cancellation and a redistribution
of land so that's that's how basically
civil western civilization began and the
reason David has been a common theme in
his books is that anthropological
societies have solved a problem that
modern societies have not solved they've
been able to deal with how do you uh let
a society run up debt and not polarize
it not drive uh debtors uh into into
bondage uh how do you get egotistical
people getting public Acclaim by helping
other people instead of hurting them
like they do today uh that
is that is what makes anthropological uh
studies so different from economic
studies where it's all about how to get
rich by uh taking the public domain in
uh into your own uh uh your own family
how how to make a fortune by enclosing
the land and taking it away from other
people and charging them rent uh that's
basically what's happened in uh in West
civilization
well the you can look at the difference
as a kind of how time is treated
the the Babylonians had a mathematical
concept of cycles of time that's much
more sophisticated than the modern
business cycle Theory and theory of
Cycles the modern cycle says just get
government out of the way we don't need
any government regulation uh uh the free
market is going to solve everything and
if the business cycle gets overheated
then it's going to uh crash but then the
crash will have a automatic stabilizer
that returns everything to normaly and
they think that somehow Western
Civilization is going to
uh go go right along pretty much in a a
nice smooth cycle well look at what's
happened since 194
the the whole world was pretty debt-free
uh in 1945 because there wasn't much to
spend during the War uh there have been
a lot of Cycles but every cycle in the
United States and England and Europe has
started from a higher and higher debt
level until today uh each cycle of
recovery is slower and slower and slower
because of this huge buildup of of debt
until now we're really in something that
isn't a cycle it's a chronic stag
stagnation it's in a chronic austerity
and you have the polarization between
the financial creditor class at the top
have having all of the growth in
national income almost all has accured
to the top 1% the bottom uh 90% have
just about steady income all of the
growth is uh goes to the credit s and uh
the result is that we're not growing
anymore ancient Society didn't have that
problem and uh when people talk about uh
trying to treat money and credit and
banking as a public utility as it is say
in in China's economy uh President Biden
says well we're in a fight between
American democracy and Asian autocracy
well what we called aut autocracy was
what the Babylonian and Samaran and near
Eastern rulers did autocracy is having
the power to prevent a wealthy Financial
oligarchy from developing and uh
democracy is uh what Aristotle said all
democracies really are turn very quickly
into oligarchies and oligarchies do not
permit any uh debt cancellation
oligarchy say once you lose your land
into the creditors the creditors get to
keep it forever and uh if you fall into
bondage if you when you can't pay your
debt you can't get out of it well we all
know what happened after uh when Rome
did that we had the Dark Age and I think
that today we're moving into uh a
different uh a similar Dark Age and in a
way what uh you could say what uh David
is uh writing has been saying is it
doesn't have to be this way uh look at
how other societies have dealt with the
fact that uh they they can uh grow
without concentrating growth into the
hands of a narrow minority of people the
ancient societies and the uh surviving
uh local enclaves that have kept their
indigenous uh practices uh they've been
able to uh continue in a stable way
uh without disappearing from uh from the
scene so it turns out to be democracies
that are not able to solve the debt
problem and restore balance uh because
they're oligarchies and it's the
so-called autocracies where you have a
single ruler that uh whose job is to
prevent an oligarchy from developing
that U is preserves stability and growth
so I think that's what uh distinguishes
David's uh
anthropological uh approach from uh the
approach of most uh economists uh and of
course I'm an economist but uh uh I
thought there has to be a different way
of developing than uh running into debt
bondage and polarizing Society between
creditors at the top and debtors at the
bottom so that's the common denominator
uh between David's research and mine uh
but we're taking him we're taking
different Vantage points from uh what
we're
describing I better stop here that's the
halfway time this will leave halfway
time for questions and discussion yeah
thank you so much Michael that's yeah
that's actually really amazing and
specifically um
about about this Cal time that I'm very
interested because I hope to write a
book with you together made differently
times
uh so we have a discussion in the chat
that is very difficult for me to follow
and I only see one question is it uh
more questions uh and if people want to
just um uh put up their
hands did I talk too fast did I actually
go over everyone's head was it all like
you exactly half an hour that's amazing
um yeah uh so if I know that it's some
questions will sent me via email I see
one question about um American
debt uh then Balaam maybe you can ask it
um V do you want to ask yourself hi yeah
thanks hi David um I just wanted to ask
um us debt is something like uh or
government debt is 125% of
GDP um and I was wondering whether mmt
means
that the US can continue to issue and
monetize its debt in order to fund its
Foreign Wars and without any consequence
is that what mmt would say or what are
the kind of there are two kinds of debt
uh there's government debt and private
debt uh the mmt says that uh the suppose
that uh look at what's happening right
now if the government runs a budget
deficit uh it has to borrow from uh the
the wealthy class and when it borrows
then it will will take this money that
the wealthy class holds somewhere uh and
spend it into the economy uh the
government can do the the same thing by
it can simply print the money itself it
doesn't have to borrow uh and the effect
of printing its money itself is exactly
the same no more inflationary at all
than borrowing the money because the
billionaires who lend put their money
into government bonds uh are not uh the
people who are going to the grocery
store and uh uh buying more groceries uh
uh instead of you and uh bidding up a
grocery price
they they only spend the money they make
on stocks and bonds and making more
loans so it's not
in you don't need to borrow money to
actually uh create it and in fact it's
much better if you don't borrow money
and in fact if you don't have a wealthy
class uh to control government at all
you can especially see this in the
foreign uh foreign money uh I worked for
the Canadian government uh writing a
book about it for forign borrowing and
in the
[Music]
1970s the banks told Canada well you
have a lot of provinces uh to want to
borrow money uh why don't you let us
Bankers arrange to borrow uh Swiss
Franks or German marks they don't charge
anywhere near as high interest as Canada
makes so you can you can borrow that and
pay only maybe 2% instead of the 6% or
whatever you're paying so uh Canada was
convinced to do this uh and what
happened uh the uh the provinces would
borrow German marks uh or Swiss Franks
they turn it over to the central bank
and the central bank would create
Canadian dollars to give to the
provinces to spend well I said why do
you need uh the German or French
creditors to do this if the uh Canadian
Central Bank is going to create these
Canadian dollars for spending anyway why
borrow it all you're going to end up
holding these mark this foreign currency
in your central bank but you don't need
the foreign currency it's all domestic
currency you might as well do it
yourself well the bank said Well when
the government spends creates money it's
inflationary look at Zimbabwe or look at
Germany and uh the 1920s well uh
Germany uh had an inflation to pay
because it had to pay reparations debt I
won't go into that but it had nothing to
do with the the bank creating money to
spend at home it was creating money to
pay foreigners not to pay domestic
people there's junk economics and U the
basically uh if you the economic
curriculum says there can't be any debt
problem because we owe the money to
ourselves well the money we owe to
ourselves meaning uh the we is the uh
99% of the popul
and to our the ourselves are the 1% of
the population uh so there's uh mmt says
you really don't need for government
spending uh to borrow money obviously
private credit is something else and it
would uh that's why uh China said well
we don't have we've just had a
revolution under Mao uh we don't have a
domestic Financial class because they
all went to Taiwan uh with chanai Sheek
so we are going to create a our society
uh and create our own Banking and our
own money we don't need uh an oligarchic
class to borrow money from we can simply
print it ourselves so uh that's
basically uh What uh mmt says you don't
need a creditor class to provide the
economy with money uh governments can
create money and the question is how do
you prevent it from being inflationary
well you take you give people need the
money anybody canate create money how
are you going to get other people to
accept it in money well you uh you Levy
taxes and people need the money that you
print if you're a government to pay the
taxes to you and so there's a circular
flow you pay money into the economy you
tax basically uh the ronas you tax the
financial sector you tax the landlords
you tax the monopolists you have a
progressive income tax and you get it
back and so there's no inflation uh at
all um I make is that clear did I
explain that
clearly yeah you did I guess is there
any limit then to the US government
printing money in order to in order to
fund its Foreign Wars I guess yes is
there a limit to
that is there a constraint to that
Michael yes yes question
uh sorry Michael I I would just ask
asking is there a constraint no to the
US government printing money in order to
fund its Foreign Wars yes it's called a
pistol it's called assassination it's
called Uh it it's called control of the
of the educational system to say that
this is impossible uh and uh when uh the
mmt graduates from uh University of
Missouri at Kansas City uh look for jobs
uh they uh
there were their universities would say
well what have you published in all of
the most reputable economic journals and
uh the economic journals would not
publish what the mmt people wrote
because they said that don't talk about
that in polite company you know uh
that's not how we want the world to work
and uh so it's very difficult for mmt
people to get their ideas uh published
uh and as I said uh David uh tried to
popularize it with Occupy Wall Street he
said well we're not going to go through
the universities we're going to go to
the people and as I said that was put
down with Obama's Iron Fist uh of just
uh calling the police on them and
smashing them up uh so uh how are people
how are economic students who study
economics going to be taught uh what I
mmt they're not they're not taught that
way and if they raise questions uh
they're not going to be promoted very
well by uh uh their faculty or hired by
uh respectable Prestige faculties like
uh uh Harvard or Yale or uh you know
other universities
Chicago yeah so then we will make uh a
course of uh in s Vincent University
where everybody can uh access this
knowledge uh so the next question is
Julian sorry thank you Michael for that
amazing presentation so my question is
very is very quick
um uh would anything change if the world
economy stops being pecked to the dollar
and becomes pecked to another currency
such as the Yuan for example is it still
a political choice to pursue you know
that kind of Imperial way of life and
perpetuate debt or are there other fact
are play thank you so much it's not just
changing currency it's what are the
rules of uh International payment if you
uh owe owe the money of uh how are you
going to raise the currency like right
now uh the dollar is going way up in
value against the Canadian dollar uh
against uh uh Global South currencies
how are these countries going to get the
money to pay the dollars if they pay the
foreign debts that they've run run up
it's very much like the 19 1980s if they
have to pay the dollar debts that they
owe uh often to their own oligarchy as
well as foreigners then they're not
going to have enough money for the
government to build infrastructure and
spend on social improvements the
governments will be broke and
essentially working as collection agents
for uh the creditors so and if uh they
were to owe the money in Euros it would
be the same even if they owed the money
in Chinese yen uh they'd Al that would
be the same so the question is what are
the rules you're going to put uh for uh
collection well back in
1944 when uh there was an argument over
what kind of international monetary fund
are we going to create John mayard Kane
said well uh you can have uh we're going
to set up countries that uh need to uh
borrow money to pay can draw on uh on
special uh fiat currency from uh the
central the World Bank he's promoting
but if a a country continues like the
United States continues to run a big
Surplus over let's say a given amount uh
for five years then the Surplus is wiped
out and if a countries are pushed way
into debt the debt is wiped out he had
sort of a debt cancellation applied to
the international uh inter governmental
debts well needless to say this is not
how the United States wanted to set up
the international monetary fund it
wanted to have all the money in the
world and get everybody in debt to it
that's what my book super imperialism is
all about and uh by
1950 the United States had uh 80% of the
world's gold Supply monetary gold Supply
uh and other countries needed gold in
order to pay their foreign debts and uh
they had to borrow the money and uh
ultimately they had to pay the debts by
selling off their raw materials selling
off their oil rights selling off their
mineral rights privatizing their public
uh infrastructure and public utilities
and uh the result is a kind of financial
colonialism and what Donald Trump
recently said is we don't have to
conquer countries militarily anymore we
can conquer them financially uh we can
use fin Cal imperialism uh is what
America is going to do because we don't
have an army anymore because uh nobody's
willing to fight an an American Army we
can hire terrorists armies and that is a
Foreign Legion but uh all we need is uh
Financial rules that are in favor of the
creditors and it doesn't matter what
currency you you own uh you owe uh your
money in but you can you can use the
debt leverage to take over other
countries and control them
Philip yeah many than for your
presentation really inspiring so I have
a question about the proposal of debt
cancellation because I remember in his
conversation with David Thomas petti uh
said something along the lines of the
problem with debt cancellation is that
the bankers agree with this proposal
because they can for instance the the
last creditor might not be a rich person
eventually and if you do depth
cancellation you can eventually end up
stabilizing capitalism which is why he
argued more for something like
Progressive Capital Tax uh and I was
wondering what your thoughts are on this
kind of critique well from the from the
political
economy
perspective well on my website uh and
you can Google it uh uh he and I had
long discussions and they're all
published there was also a whole volume
of uh uh book uh about his ideas that I
had articles in we've been discussing
this uh for many years uh he's hasn't
pressed thatt cancellation to the point
that I have his point is number one you
want an inheritance tax because most
wealth is inherited and if you tax it
away that is a kind of cyclical uh point
you can accumulate a fortune and then
the fortune disappears you a lot of
Fortunes in Babylonian times in the 19th
18th century BC but then in a few a few
Generations later there's no sign of
this Fortune anymore you didn't have
long inherited fortunes creating
dynasties uh and uh uh he wants to uh
prevent dynasties from coming
inheritance tax is one one thing uh
progressive taxation uh he's in favor of
because then if you have progressive
taxation you won't have fortunes built
up like they are today when the Richer
you are the lower the tax rates you pay
and the really rich people don't have to
pay any uh tax the landlords don't have
to pay an income tax because of all of
the tax right offs uh that they're given
uh or they can operate of Offshore
Banking centers uh and the in tax-free
uh uh banking centers uh and do that so
that's that's something and I I think
over time uh he's come across more to
the uh uh to agree that yes you do need
uh debt cancellations but I can show you
the banks really are not in favor of any
debts being cancelled to themselves they
want to be reimbursed for the
cancellation so if uh in the United
States if uh uh look at what happened uh
after 2008 when the banks uh uh had
suffered from these junk mortgages the
he enormous bank fraud that led to the
collapse uh and Obama said uh he said
I'm going to bail out the banks they're
my constituency the banks won't lose
money but if the the uh victims who
signed the chunk mortgages they're going
to lose their homes I'm going to evict 8
million people uh from their homes uh uh
essentially to let the wealthy people uh
buy up their houses and turn them into
rental properties uh but but I'm going
to make sure that no bank is going to
lose the money uh because these yes
they're criminals but they're my
criminals that's my constituency that's
my donor class so basically uh as long
as the banks have uh a thug in charge
like Obama they uh uh can manage to just
always bail themselves out so the way to
prevent that is to have your slogan
should be no more Obamas
uh think I just wanted to say that yeah
uh I I I also want to ask one question
about uh taxes that was by stas cve stas
do you want to ask yourself if you're
here do you want me to read it
stas yeah yeah I I'm here uh well uh
hello Michael so we've been reading uh
this uh David's peace against economics
uh for this meeting well um uh David
there attacks a lot of
microeconomists neoliberal BR whatever
so uh there are multiple things uh I
could ask you about this piece uh one
that Nik refers to is
uh is a question of taxes David has a a
thesis there that uh there are many more
ways to do taxes uh rather than income
tax but we stuck with income tax because
it is intentionally designed
to be invasive
expensive uh to feel little bit unfair
and the point is to
uh to generate resentment to the
government so
what do you think about like the this
two two side question are there really
absolutely best ways to tax than income
and uh could it be that income tax is
our goto method because it is a best way
to
paint any go any tax collector as a bad
guy I think we have a bad collection did
you connection did you say a trump
tax income tax
uh what tax income yeah well of course
uh the the rich people you know don't
really make income only the poor people
make an income uh because uh if you make
an income you pay tax on it uh the rich
people don't want to make tax so they
don't they don't make any income at all
uh what they want if you look at the
real estate fortunes uh rent is for
paying interest so they'll uh borrow
money to uh buy a building they'll pay
all of the rent the income they get
they'll pay to the bank as interest what
they want is a capital gain almost all
there there's a tendency of people to
think that rich people get rich from
saving up their income that's what
they're taught in universities that's
what Nobel prizes are given for it's
absolute garbage uh it's a distraction
from how rich people really make their
money and that's capital gains they get
uh there's asset price inflation if you
look at what's happened since 2008
there's been enormous growth in the
stock market from
6,500 it's the stock market has gone up
six times since uh uh 2008 from about
6500 to uh I guess 30 it's now up to 40
uh 40,000 and uh the people's real wages
haven't gone up at all they've been
absolutely stable so uh stocks gone up
you've had the biggest bond market rally
in history real estate prices have gone
up uh but um the uh the wealthy people
have paid less and less and less taxes
because there really isn't a tax uh very
much on capital gains or at least you
don't have to pay it uh until uh you
actually sell the building but if you
sell the building and you buy another
building or you'll sell a stock and buy
another stock then uh it's called
preserving your wealth and then when you
die uh there's no uh you don't have to
pay any of the capital gains so uh the
the whole idea of is if people get rich
by Saving instead of uh creating an
economy that inflates the price of
housing inflates the price of bonds uh
by lowering interest rates quantitative
easing inflates the stock market that's
how they get rich and that's what is not
taught at all in uh uh in
universities uh
Mark yes hi uh Mark Heath uh hi Mike uh
big fan of your work with Randall Ray
and the archaeology of money back in the
day uh I had a question about uh the the
grand Dole of the Roman Empire and
specifically I you know I know that uh
before he was assassinated Julius Caesar
was planning on uh forgiving the debts
uh in related to the graind Dole uh I'm
a bit hazy on that would you please
expound upon that if you will please
well he uh it turned out Caesar really
only cancel the debts for the rich
people uh he did he had been a support
of the debt Revolution uh uh that that
the military up put down he'd been there
was a whole cadalene uh conspiracy where
Cataline tried to have the very last
protest of dors in Rome uh It Was
Defeated and uh Caesar saw that well he
couldn't really do that uh he had he saw
that there was a debt problem but he
tried to keep uh the rich on his side
because it was an oligarchy after all uh
and so he ended up
uh creating a complex bankruptcy law and
I've described this in my book the
collapse of antiquity uh the bankruptcy
law essentially freed uh the rich people
from the debts uh that that they owed uh
but not uh the poor people from their
debts but the he was killed because the
Senate and the oligarchy thought that
well he supported uh the poor
people who were debtors before he may do
it again they killed him because of what
they were worried he was going to do in
supporting the debtors uh not because uh
of what he'd actually done so far they
knew where his sympathies
lay so since we have only seven minut
left uh maybe we can take all the
questions at once and then uh Michael
will answer I I can't remember all of
them at once
no okay so just try to be very short
then uh so oh
maew hi Michael um hi I'm struck that
money is used for many purposes in
society it's a sort it's fundamentally
it's a sorting mechanism ISM it sorts
our economic priorities but it also
accounts for them and politics is
another kind of sorting mechanism for
priorities in society and these two seem
to be in conflict in a way and what we
see in America today is that the
oligarchy have bought democracy Lock
Stock and Barrel um and I'm
wondering how we how we resolve this in
the longer term because we need to find
balance we clearly need to find balance
and Harmony and the processes are just
not working everybody knows nothing's
working properly it's working just fine
if you're a member of the 1% working for
whom that's the that's the thing un
working for the
99% yeah uh they would have to develop
uh their own economic uh uh program of
saying here is what we want as a
political program here and they haven't
done that and in fact the bricks country
have not done that either there's uh
they're reacting to uh the the oligarchy
making their economic position worse and
worse and worse but they're they don't
have an alternative so all they can do
is saying well we don't want the
Republicans so we're going to vote in
Biden oh we don't want the Democrats so
we're going to vote in the Republican
again they they're just bounced back and
forth uh between uh parties that are
really the same party with the same same
set of donors and uh uh nothing's
happening so unless they develop a
theory I guess it used to be called
socialism uh there's not going to be
much progress and uh in Europe it's only
the rightwing that is uh uh protesting
against the system but the right-wing is
not about to bring about socialism so uh
the United States is pretty much uh used
its uh uh non-governmental organization
uh the National Endowment for democracy
and uh all these grant-giving
organizations have found their talent
scouts they look for people like Tony
Blair or like uh Ananda and F the the
French Prime Ministers or uh the German
uh social Democrats Schulz say look for
people who are going to do whatever the
United States tells them to do and those
are the people they promote velan and
others and uh uh the
uh the 99% really don't have a clue as
to how to develop their own party and
their own candidates uh largely because
uh the mainstream press will not give
them much attention uh the media won't
give them much attention uh I guess
they're all here on uh the internet
today and that's about it Michael I've
said just a very quick supplementary
I've said for many years that the left
has significantly failed to come up with
and articulate a vision for society that
people can buy into and that's what's
creating right-wing populism the the
failure of of figures at the top of the
left to do this yes that's why David is
talked about anthropology uh he he's he
said look he knew that he could not
convert uh the economists profession so
he thought maybe he can go to
anthropology and uh get a response that
way and I think that obviously I've uh
followed him along that line thank you
uh yes there is one more question from
petus oh hi thank you um yeah I just
first of all thank you Michael that's
been very um enlightening um I just want
to give you question the following when
we talk about death cancellation as a
concept are we looking at this um as a
oneoff or are we looking at um doing
away with the concept of debt as some
would need in the economy in other words
is debt necessary in other words well
here's the problem when you cancel some
it's actually the the good thing the
best thing about cancelling the debts is
you cancel somebody's savings on the
other side of the balance sheet because
one person's debt uh is uh the asset of
one of the the billionaires who control
the banking system so cancelling debts
you can think of it as cancelling out
the savings of the oligarchy that's how
you get rid of an oligarchy or if you're
a country a socialist country it's how
you prevent an oligarchy from developing
in the first place so uh if you think in
terms of a balance sheet uh one person's
debt on one side of balance sheet is a
wealthy creditor on the other side of
the balance sheet uh you want both sides
of the balance sheet to go down uh
President Obama uh canell uh all all of
the
uh what the 1% owed uh but he didn't
cancel he he saved the savings but he
didn't cancel the debts so that's
exactly what you don't want you want a
kind of
anti-obama uh to do
that okay we're exactly one minute left
can I also ask one question uh
so I'm actually interested in a concept
of time thinking about Theory
so am I am I understanding correctly
that the one of the biggest problem is
our perception of time in western
civilization when we think like
progressivist linear uh and the the
other many other civilization think
cyclic cyclically so they kind of
naturally canceling the de starting from
uh all over again but it's very
difficult and complicated to to attack
the the very idea of what is time and I
want to point out that Russian
Revolution French Revolution they all
started from making their own calendar
you know just setting everything
straight so uh and I know that you like
you are Anthropologist as well so can we
look for other civilization maybe or
other models uh to inspire yes well
there's the whole concept of new year
throughout the whole world on certainly
in Asia on the New
Year in the new year you clean clean
your house you you go from door to door
you pay all the debts that you have uh
to everybody everything in Balance uh
Michael is it only me or everybody else
too n m your mic I can hear him fine I
hear can you hear
me yes it's only na I think n can't you
Michael hang on let me just have am I
wait so you cannot hear
me na can't hear you something happens I
have no idea I haven't done anything
here somebody turned me off
there huh no it's not on your it's fine
we can hear you and you can hear me I
believe I think yeah Michael continue
don't worry continue
uh can can you hear me yet uh now I can
yeah sorry about this I don't know what
to
say uh everything's on let me take a
look uh everything is fine now no then I
have no idea what happened oh uh okay
the whole Western idea of progress is
linear it goes in One Direction uh as uh
Margaret Hatcher would say there is no
alternative once you uh created a
wealthy billionaire class you can't get
take the billionaire away you can't
start all over again you can't go back
to the beginning and put Society in
Balance uh and so uh ancient Society uh
and anthropological Society said uh we
know that they're always going to be in
inequities developing there are always
going to be imbalances and uh uh debts
that acre we want to get rid of all of
these problems that occur we want to we
want to start everything in order where
nobody owes anything to anybody and
everybody life is beginning like it
should in a smooth way uh so that we
don't have but uh they knew that it was
going to get out of order again they
knew that every economy gets unbalanced
over time and so you need to continually
begin again and that was the concept of
circular time uh that they had in
Antiquity great yeah so thank you so
much much um uh I don't know if anybody
wants to say something as a as a closing
statement I don't know who Chris maybe
you want to say
something okay like thank you so much
Michael for coming we will put a video
online and send it to you too and if
you're okay with that I can publish your
notes that is really beautifully
beautiful text uh like a summarizing
this it's just not to publish my notes
those were from something that I'm I'm
writing on best just to publish this on
or just to publish the the video okay
cool yes I will do that um thank you
everybody for coming and so we will have
our next meeting with Steve keing uh in
a month uh so everybody welcome and I
see you Michael in New York soon good
see you then n bye bye bye bye